---
id: 13
title: 'Blog Post: Thursday, 08-04-22'
slug: blog-post-8
section: Blog
date: 'August 4th, 2022'
img: Boring-Market.png
categories:
  - Investing
---

Today's events include:<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;None
<br><br>
Traded events include:<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;None
<br><br>
Today's picture is from: dalle, boring market

<!--more-->

### EVENTS TODAY

Nothing again. Only looked at $UVXY at open and at close. Couldn't even tell you how $SPY did. Biden declared a national emergency for monkeypox. Will he even do anything? I'm keeping the pic as boring market cuz who cares. My 0th reader is gonna cry.

Watching this happen is just deteriorating. I feel awful. The crash needs to happen but oh my god could we not. I'm not joking when I say I'd rather be vaporized in a nuclear holocost than have to ive through this. The financial foundation of the world is about to be uprooted. Not even just uprooted. We are about to find out the stone we built our global house on was actually just sandstone. When the water comes in the sandstone will just wash away. Can we just not? Can we just go on without money or a system? Is there even a system to go to? It sucks that humanity stumbles and falls over and over. Will we ever learn our lesson? This really sucks. And I've tried to tell people; it's just no one wants to listen. The appeal to authority has to much pull. It's too alluring. Right now I wish Jesus would just start the rapture so we could avoid everything. This sucks. I legitamitelly feel like my psychie is falling apart. 1-1 correlation with the economy. Let's just all decide to live in harmony. Wouldn't that be nice.


### TODAY'S TRADES

Events: None

Nothing.


| Date     | Buy/Sell | Ticker | Amount | Call/Put | Strike | Expiration Date | Average Price | Total |
| -------- | -------- | ------ | ------ | -------- | ------ | --------------- | ------------- | ----- |


### WEBSITE PROGRESS

Added credit market to the concepts notes