---
id: 3
title: Schizo Sunday; It's All Over! How Monkeypox will Crash the Market.
slug: schizo-sunday-monkeypox
date: 'July 24th, 2022'
img: monkeypox.png
categories:
  - Psychology
  - The Flations
  - Economics of Nations
  - Debt
  - Investing
---

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A fast spreading, unknown, and painful virus is here again. Recently declared a "global emergency" by the WHO; monkeypox has infected 65 countries, had untraceable community infections, and has infected children. Is Monkeypox Covid 2.0? How did markets react last time? The zombie business cycle will be forced to end!</p>

<!--more-->

Clickbait title I know, but let's get into it and see if this is dumb or not. This is the loose outline for the "article". First, I'm going to talk about monkeypox. Similarities to Covid and HIV/AIDS, What it is, how it is different than the past versions. Second is the economy and markets. Why we are not out of 2008's shadow, why the market is as bloated as it is, and the future of the economy. Finally we are going to combine the two sections. I'm going to talk about demand, deflation, and possible outcomes of this unfortunate mess. 

- Severity and Spread of Monkeypox
  - Similarities to covid and HIV/AIDS
  - Severity
  - Spread
- Economy and Markets
  - 2008 and its crises
  - Bloated by all means
  - The future even without monkeypox
- The Unfortunate Combination:
  - Demand
  - Deflation
  - The facts

Also important to note that this is purely a commentary piece. Do not expect me to walk through every fact or even maintain mainstream economic views. This site is in its birth currently: for the future I am going to put all articles on a scale of purely academic to purely commentary. The first article, "What are bonds?", is purely academic. This will be purely commentary. When an article is made about the basics of the yield curve it'll be mostly academic but partly commentary. I will not be completely fact checking this article. I will be writing out what information my ADHD brain is okay will holding. The idea of what I'm saying is based in fact but the exact number may not be. For example: I'm saying 5+4 = ~10. 5+4 may not actually equal 10 but its a good estimate and close enough to operate on. Except for the Biology part: I just barely think I know what I'm talking about. Econ is on lock tho.


I watched covid when it was just beginning to spread. I watched when China was just under 100 cases and Japan, South Korea, and lots of other neighboring countries all started to get a single digit amount of cases. I saw the virus hop to nation and then have it bloom into 2, 3, and 4 digits cases fast. I saw instances of people being infected with Covid yet they never left their daily routine, had been in contact with anyone sick, or had left the country. I saw cruise lines become super spreader events just by existing. And to top it all off I saw the markets decisive understanding of the future. The markets knew how impossible this would be to contain and how demand would die like a candle in tsunami. And then something miraculous happened: each nation did two things. First the central bank of a nation eased it's monetary policy. This made money cheap and stopped the the crisis that was forming. And second, the government swooped in a bailed everyone out. In essence: everyone kicked the can. "Let's deal with later". Now the bill is due and it's bigger than before.

<br>

### Spread and Severity of Monkeypox:

Monkeypox has been around for a bit and usually it's not too scary. In Africa, around Nigeria and neighboring countries, this virus has been endemic. It never became a large problem in the country and did not spread far. As for Africa, this is nothing new. Many viruses and diseases are endemic in Africa as most nations in Africa are not developed to the point the western world is. This is largely okay with the majority of the world as it's easy to think "who cares it doesn't affect me". This logic works out great until it does affect you, and it's starting to.

Monkeypox started spreading outside of Africa about a month or two ago, and monkeypox has about the same origin that HIV/AIDS had. Started in the gay/bisexual community, unknown spread, and-from what I've seen-a universal want to call it a "gay disease" by outsiders. However, this virus also has a lot in common with Covid. We have a virus that previously did not spread or show characteristics it does now, was contained in the past, and has a striking amount of differences with the past when looking at the amino acids.

The differences in amino acids between Covid and it's past (SARS, MERS) actually made pretty big waves. Covid was structurally different and needed an approach that was faster and more flexible than the SARS and MERS approach. SARS and MERS were contained only because someone could only infect another person when they were showing symptoms themselves. So all the CDC (or a nations respective health organization) had to do was trace everyone who was sick or was in contact with someone was sick. And then lock down anyone on that list who was showing symptoms. This worked and SARS and MERS became contained; the virus can be put on ice and forgotten about. However, this was not the case for Covid and thus is became and pandemic we will never get rid of. The large jump in amino acids and characteristics for Covid prompted the lab leak theory to exist. (I don't know anything about this theory other than it talks about Covid coming from a lab)

Monkeypox is following in the shadow of Covid. Around 20 amino acids are different than the past versions of monkeypox. And the basic approach we were taking before is failing to contain the spread now. Monkeypox has shown in 65 countries with 15,600 cases and has community spread. An article from a local fox news station talked about community spread a month ago. On June 30th Lauren Talarico wrote "The Texas Department of Health is now reporting 12 cases statewide, three of which are not linked to travel, indicating that transmission is now happening in the community." in her [article](https://www.khou.com/article/news/local/monkeypox-in-texas-community-transmission/285-dd826376-ede2-471f-a8a3-940a31929c38). This virus is also no joke. Many who get it are miserable for its experience. One [article](https://www.cbsnews.com/newyork/news/monkeypox-patient-interview-lesions/) from CBS has an excerpt about how brutal the virus is "A few days later, he says he developed intense flu-like symptoms, but as those went away, he says, 'More and more lesions were appearing ... And by far the worst part was the pain. I mean, to the point that I had to be prescribed narcotic painkillers just to be able to go to sleep.'". I don't exactly want a virus that gives me so much pain I need narcotic painkiller just to sleep. Other monkeypox symptoms include Fever, Headache, Muscle aches and backache, Swollen lymph nodes, Chills, and Exhaustion. On top of this is the infamous pox-virus rash which you can see some photos of [here](https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/symptoms.html) on the CDC's website. These photos are <b>TAME</b> compared to the more difficult to view photos I have seen. From what I've seen and read this virus looks like a month of hell.

But let's talk about spread real quick. Or better yet how little we know about spread. As of right now the accepted position I see coming from various governments is that monkeypox will only spread through sex. Now, I have to admit, that about a week ago I say a brief blip about how it was 95% through sex. And while that 5% break may seem small that uncertainty-or at the very least lack-of knowledge-is quite important. Because it shows we don't 100% know how monkeypox spreads. Just from a <b>brief</b> look at google I see that the CDC says there is no air to air spread, but I see other articles saying that there is potential for air to air spread. Remember what happened with covid? No air to air spread one week and the next we are all wearing masks. I really don't think the CDC has reliable information about how the current version of monkeypox spreads. I think they are using past data which will not work for the present situation. The CDC (and government in general) makes this mistake often. Case and point being Covid. 

I am going to posit the idea the monkeypox can spread in ways we are 100% sure it can. And to do this I think we really only have to look at a couple points of information. First, children and getting sick. One [article](https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/22/health/monkeypox-children-vaccine/index.html) briefly talks about this saying "One case is a toddler who is a resident of California. The other is an infant who is not a US resident. Public health officials are investigating how the children were infected.". This shows that at the very least the spread is not contained to just sex. Second we can see that the virus jumps countries pretty fast. This is where I would break out a chart if I had the data (or knew how to put an image in an article). I can't find the data anywhere so I'm going to have to go off my own intuition/knowledge, but I'm pretty sure it took a long bit for Covid to make it to 65 countries. When in direct comparison for this point of data it seems that monkeypox is the clear winner in spreadability. However, on the flip side you could easily make the argument that Covid would go unnoticed as a majority of people just felt like they had a cold. While with monkeypox you see lesions and thus it is easily tracked. Next we can look cases and how fast that is rising. Again, I would throw pictures and stuff here but I don't have it or the data. So your going to have to take my word for it: monkeypox is spreading as fast as covid. It's actually moving so fast that the [monkeypox subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/Monkeypox/) had a joke that went bust rather quick. "no need to panic. There are more members of this sub than there are cases". Now 15.6K cases vs. 12.6K members. Overall I think it's fair to say that monkeypox is spreading fast and probably in ways we don't know about.

In conclusion for this section: Monkeypox is no joke and should be taken seriously.

<br>

### Economy and Markets:

The economy and the market are in a rather precarious position. After 2008 there were some <b>MAJOR</b> cracks showing. This cracks were actually so big that we, as a nation, decided to just bail everyone out and to not deal with it. A majority of our banks were insolvent and a credit crisis was forming. On top of this we saw that the global economy and financial system relied on America and that without America it would all collapse. The global aspect of this will not be talked about here as it would take forever. The famous line I always hear was that McDonalds was actually about to fail to make payroll as the bank McDonald's uses was insolvent. And it's pretty clear to see how that turns out for the economy. Companies not making payroll and people not paying bills is a recipe for financial collapse. A collapse so monumental that you can't really even fully blame the government for bailing everyone out. Would you postpone a second great depression? No matter what your answer to the question was: the collapse was postponed. The United States government and the central bank (federal reserve) enacted quickly and decisively to the rapidly forming crises. 

#### Crises 1: Insolvent banks.

What did they do? First the federal government bailed out the banks with around ~600 billion (I think that amount is right) to avoid banking and credit collapse. If your banks and credit system collapse then the economy falters and there is no saving it. There would be no money flowing, no credit creation, and no ability to take out a loan. This means no house buying and no new businesses. On top of this any business that did not make net profits would die. The majority of young business do not make net profits. Having an economy without flowing credit is like having a car without an engine. One sneaky action was also taken from the federal reserve that in my opinion isn't talked about as much as it should be. Working with J.P. Morgan they fixed the problem of Bear Stearns being insolvent. J.P. Morgan would acquire Bear Stearns at $2 a share while the federal reserve would buy $30 billion worth of mortgages. Important to note that the mortgages were largely worthless as Americans couldn't pay their bills. This is the first time ever that a central bank was involved in a bank acquisition. Bear Stearns was also trading at $160 a year ago. That's quite a drop to $2. Never the less this solved the banking crises. 

On to the next crises.

#### Crises 2: An economy without a consumer.

At it's core an economy is a machine driven by a consumer. If your consumer no longer has demands then the economy has no reason to exist. Why build cars or tvs or houses no one wants? But of course it's not that simple everyone wants that T.V. and everyone would love to live in a mansion. But if the consumer can't afford to buy then who cares what they want or what is being produced. All capitalist economies are based on free markets. And all free markets require capital to operate. Someone has to be a buyer with capital and someone has to be a seller. So in all capitalist economies that internal consumer is beholden to capital restrictions. And "capital restrictions" is just a fancy term I'm using to say the consumer can't buy anything they can't afford, and if the consumer wishes to pay with debt then that payment is restricted to wether or not the financial system would allow that transaction to take place. And in the case of 2008 we see there are very little loans being made and debt is to be avoided at almost all costs. So the consumer is shackled and not willing or able to buy. This drags an economy down and can really only ever lead to a recession or a depression. 

So how did that problem get solved? The federal reserve solved it with what I like to call economic cocaine but is commonly called QE. I'm briefly going to talk about what QE is but this is another instance where it would take a bit to explain QE and it will get its own article soon (tbh idk how soon). I also briefly have the wealth effect for which I am going to link the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wealth_effect) also. In its essence the wealth effect states that people who feel richer will spend more money and people who feel poorer will spend less. Now it doesn't actually matter if you are richer or not. What only matters is how you feel. If a millionaire feels poor they will spend less and save more. If a homeless dude feels like millionaire than he'll spend every dollar he gets. And before you say "This sounds stupid and illogical": don't forget: humans are irrational. To put this back in perspective: This means the federal reserve should really only care about one thing. Does the consumer who is driving the economy feel wealthy? Which brings us back to QE. QE simply inflates all asset prices by bringing aggregate demand in from the future. This asset price appreciation also includes all assets (stocks) in the stock market. Again this sounds like BS but you kinda just gotta go with me for a sec. And you can even see the assets inflate in real time. When assets start dropping in value the federal reserve will step in with QE to keep he core consumer feeling wealthy. A wealthy feeling core consumer will keep buying and thus the economy goes on forever. Now it's important to note: it is impossible to keep this charade going forever. Due to capitalism the rich, over time, will grab a bigger portion of the pie leaving the 99% with nothing. You can also see this with charts. Wealth inequality is the biggest it's ever been in America. We are actually so in-equal here in America that our divide between the rich and the poor(everyone else) is bigger than France's was pre-revolution. Fun, right?

The federal reserve did a second thing to end the crises. They enacted 0% rates. I'm pretty sure the actually rate was .25% but by almost every metric that is essentially just 0 (especially when compared to the 6% it was pre crises). This lowers the cost of borrower and makes money cheaper. Cheap money is easy to spend. Expensive money is not. This all feeds into the idea that federal reserve wants to keep demand going. When demand dies the economy dies. Dropping rates to 0% is widely considered the most important move that got the economy going again. And I would agree that it is monumental especially considering the after affects of 0% rates. Debt is beyond cheap. 

2% yearly inflation is considered to be healthy for an economy. It will drive people to spend money or to invest that money and will affect everyone. Healthy inflation will cause people to not want to hold onto cash as eventually it'll be worthless. Ray Dalio has a famous line that summarises his model of the economic machine perfectly: "one man's spending is another man's income". If you can persuade someone with 2% inflation to make that transaction happen faster then you can improve the overall economy. With debt however you can allow transaction that couldn't take place to take place. How? If before the spender couldn't spend because they had no money but can now spend debt: then more people will have more income. But debt isn't free. We can't spend money we don't have forever eventually we have to pay it back with <b>interest</b>. Now it's important to understand that the federal reserve sets the baseline for interest rates and banks are not beholden to the rate set. Banks could give out money at 100% or -50% interest. But in general the rate set by the bank will follow the federal funds rate and the yield curve (another future article). This allows for cheap money and debt that gets the economy going!

Herculean effort right? Yes! It was the biggest coordinated effort any government has every done to avoid a problem (until Covid 2020). But all the king's horses and all the king's men couldn't put Humpty together again. 

#### Crises 3: The heart of America is still fading.

The final step: in 2010 the housing market was taking its toll on America. It became clear that housing was thee core of the American economy and that housing prices dropping was not sustainable long term. So something had to be done. The housing price drops that occurred from the start of the crises until now needed to stop. So the federal reserve stepped in with one last measure. They would buy mortgages (MBSs) from banks. This gave housing a core consumer and allowed the market to continue. Even if it probably should have died.
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

The federal reserve has enacted QE, and MBS purchases multiple times over the past ~15 years. This inflates all assets (especially housing) and leaves us in the situation we are in now. We have a wildly over valued stock market (again graph here, but omg is it bad). A over valued housing market (graph). And a core consumer that is barely hanging on. Also you need take into account that as of right now we have 9% inflation eating away at the core consumers ability to buy. People can't spend money they don't have forever and not a whole lot of people got 9% raises. And to top it ALL off: NONE of the core problems that arose in 2008 actually got solved. The delayed bill will eventually come due.

Note: rates were actually slowly risen in 2018 which caused a minor stock market crash. This minor crash was stopped with QE and the rates remained at 2.5% for about a year until covid when the went to 0%.

Recent economic developments have shown that the bill may actually be coming due. Inflation is at a 40 year high, and the federal reserve has recently been aggressively reversing course to control it. This involves raising rates and doing QT. QT is just the opposite of QE and matters A LOT, however rising rates (especially at the pace they are doing it) is more important for economic health. The rate raises have been nothing to baulk at the federal reserve raised .75% in June which is has not happened for 20 years. As of July 24th 2022 the market is also pricing in a 20% chance of a 1% raise. This level of federal fund rate raise hasn't happened in 40 years. And you also have to take into consideration how this affects debt. When rates are dropped to 0% money becomes cheap. Cheap debt is easy to accrue because the cheap money is easy to spend. But when you raise rates that debt becomes heavier. At 0% rates the money spent is nice but at-even as low as-2% rates that debt becomes heavier. It's also important to take into consideration that not all debt is affected by the rates rising. However, a sizable portion of overall debt is. That's bad. This also makes all loans more expensive as the base rate will be higher. Again bad for the economy.

On top of this we also see end of business cycle (again I can't explain here; future article) indicators flashing. We have had two quarters of negative GDP growth which by definition is a recession. And new business orders, consumer sentiment, and most of the stock market are dropping fast(pictures pictures pictures). Almost any forward looking indicator you look at is screaming that we are entering some hard times. But, the fed is not looking at forward looking indicators. They are solely watching backward looking indicators to fight inflation. This may (100% will) cause them to over tighten causing un needed economic hardships. 

Economies and Markets of this size and with these problems do not go down without a crash. The situation is dire by any perspective and I fear the grim reaper may be here soon. 

<br>

### The Unfortunate Combination:

Now let's combine the two pieces together in a section that hopefully isn't as long as the others. 

Covid noticeably impacted the market and the economy. How? Well the market immediately crashed and crashed HARD. 30% loss in 3 weeks is on par with the worst of them. And the economy didn't get off easy either. By any standard you can see that for that brief moment the economy had a heart attack. And we actually had deflation for a second. Deflation is a part of the 2008 crises I did not want to get into. Deflation and inflations are complex topics. So complex in fact that inflation is a phenomenon and by certain viewpoints not even real. But inflation and deflation is easy to grasp. As I mentioned earlier 2% inflation is usually considered healthy. While 9% isn't so much. Deflation on the other hand is lethal. You do not want your economy to have deflation. This will cause people to not want to spend money as it will be worth more in the future. This is a viscous cycle where eventually no core consumer will exist. One major aspect about getting America out of the great depression was forcing inflation to exist and killing deflation. This was done by F.D.R. raising the price of gold to random amount during his breakfast (yes, the price of gold really was set at the president's breakfast). And by getting America involved in WWII which creates aggregate demand. In conclusion avoid deflation at all costs.

I have a great analogy for inflation and deflation that summarizes it perfectly. Inflation at 2% is like your heart beating normally. This is healthy and should be the normal. Inflation at 9% is like your heart beating at 150BPM. This is not normal or healthy long term, but acceptable for a brief period of time. Your body is still getting oxygen, but youd rather not have this long term. But what about deflation? deflation is like your heart beating backwards. Your body is no longer getting a stable supply of oxygen and now the cells have to make a choice. Will they use the oxygen they have left to continue your bodies functions or will the cell use the oxygen they have left to keep itself alive? Will John Doe (the cell) continue buying products and services that are not neccesary which keep the economy (the body) going or will he only spend money (oxygen) on products or services only he needs (the cell)? Should you priorize the cell or the body? The person or the economy?

However sometimes deflation can not be avoided. In the case of 2008 we avoided deflation by bailing out banks, doing QE, dropping rates to 0% and then finally having the federal reserve buy MBS. Success. In the case of 2020 with covid was also avoided deflation by doing LOTS of QE and dropping rates to 0%. The federal reserve actually went so far with QE that it announced it would be doing unlimited QE. And on this announcement the stock market crash ended and we went on to the spectacular recovery you know today. If you want to avoid an economic crash just do economic drugs.

So where does that put us? We have a core consumer that can't afford much of anything due to both 9% inflation eating away at a consumers ability to spend and QE pricing out entire generations from certain markets such as the housing market. On top of this we have a virus spreading fast with an unknown ability to spread and what looks like a month of pain. Now before your go and say "Oh monkeypox death rate is low so far it won't have an impact on the economy" I would point out that covid has a 1% death rate. That 1% death rate was not what did the damage to the economy and to markets. What did the damage was the potential for it to hurt the core consumer. Lockdowns stopped people from going outside and shopping and people didn't want to go to stores because they could be infected. The lack of spending is what hurt the economy not anything from the virus.

What happens when you apply these thoughts to monkeypox? Well it get's worse and a lot worse. By all accounts monkeypox is worse than Covid. The pain is very real and it even manifests itself with lesions and a rash. People are going to avoid this disease simply because it sucks. Would you be willing to try on clothes at say JcPenny if there is a chance you'll be severely sick for a month? Would you want to go to a bar or a club only to end up with lesions for a month? The average person would say no and that's why in March 2020 both the stock market and the economy briefly died due to Covid. 

How will this affect demand?

The Final paragraph: We have discussed a lot and I don't want to drag you along anymore. I'm going to lay out the facts and let you come to your own conclusion.

1. The economy has been artificially propped up with QE, 0% rates, government bailouts, and federal reserve MBS purchases.
2. The economy has weak core consumer which is reaching the last bits of its life. 
3. The economy is actively crumbling. Two quarters of GDP decrease and 40 year high inflation is hurting everyone.
4. Covid exposed the cracks in the system and gave us a brief bit of deflation.
5. In the span of a month Covid crashed the markets with the fastest rate ever.
6. Monkeypox is following the same path as Covid and looks to be worse by a lot of metrics.

How do you feel about the future of the economy?
